Chapter 10

Once a day I descend to the base of the cliff and hunt, and fill my
stomach with water from a clear cold spring.  I have three gourds which
I fill with water and take back to my cave against the long nights.  I
have fashioned a spear and a bow and arrow, that I may conserve my
ammunition, which is running low.  My clothes are worn to shreds.
Tomorrow I shall discard them for leopard-skins which I have tanned and
sewn into a garment strong and warm.  It is cold up here.  I have a
fire burning and I sit bent over it while I write; but I am safe here.
No other living creature ventures to the chill summit of the barrier
cliffs.  I am safe, and I am alone with my sorrows and my remembered
joys--but without hope. It is said that hope springs eternal in the
human breast; but there is none in mine.

I am about done.  Presently I shall fold these pages and push them into
my thermos bottle.  I shall cork it and screw the cap tight, and then I
shall hurl it as far out into the sea as my strength will permit.  The
wind is off-shore; the tide is running out; perhaps it will be carried
into one of those numerous ocean-currents which sweep perpetually from
pole to pole and from continent to continent, to be deposited at last
upon some inhabited shore.  If fate is kind and this does happen, then,
for God's sake, come and get me!

It was a week ago that I wrote the preceding paragraph, which I thought
would end the written record of my life upon Caprona. I had paused to
put a new point on my quill and stir the crude ink (which I made by
crushing a black variety of berry and mixing it with water) before
attaching my signature, when faintly from the valley far below came an
unmistakable sound which brought me to my feet, trembling with
excitement, to peer eagerly downward from my dizzy ledge.  How full of
meaning that sound was to me you may guess when I tell you that it was
the report of a firearm!  For a moment my gaze traversed the landscape
beneath until it was caught and held by four figures near the base of
the cliff--a human figure held at bay by three hyaenodons, those
ferocious and blood-thirsty wild dogs of the Eocene.  A fourth beast
lay dead or dying near by.

I couldn't be sure, looking down from above as I was; but yet I
trembled like a leaf in the intuitive belief that it was Lys, and my
judgment served to confirm my wild desire, for whoever it was carried
only a pistol, and thus had Lys been armed.  The first wave of sudden
joy which surged through me was short-lived in the face of the
swift-following conviction that the one who fought below was already
doomed.  Luck and only luck it must have been which had permitted that
first shot to lay low one of the savage creatures, for even such a
heavy weapon as my pistol is entirely inadequate against even the
lesser carnivora of Caspak. In a moment the three would charge! A
futile shot would but tend more greatly to enrage the one it chanced to
hit; and then the three would drag down the little human figure and
tear it to pieces.

And maybe it was Lys!  My heart stood still at the thought, but mind
and muscle responded to the quick decision I was forced to make. There
was but a single hope--a single chance--and I took it. I raised my
rifle to my shoulder and took careful aim.  It was a long shot, a
dangerous shot, for unless one is accustomed to it, shooting from a
considerable altitude is most deceptive work. There is, though,
something about marksmanship which is quite beyond all scientific laws.

Upon no other theory can I explain my marksmanship of that moment.
Three times my rifle spoke--three quick, short syllables of death. I
did not take conscious aim; and yet at each report a beast crumpled in
its tracks!

From my ledge to the base of the cliff is a matter of several thousand
feet of dangerous climbing; yet I venture to say that the first ape
from whose loins my line has descended never could have equaled the
speed with which I literally dropped down the face of that rugged
escarpment.  The last two hundred feet is over a steep incline of loose
rubble to the valley bottom, and I had just reached the top of this
when there arose to my ears an agonized cry--"Bowen!  Bowen!  Quick, my
love, quick!"

I had been too much occupied with the dangers of the descent to glance
down toward the valley; but that cry which told me that it was indeed
Lys, and that she was again in danger, brought my eyes quickly upon her
in time to see a hairy, burly brute seize her and start off at a run
toward the near-by wood.  From rock to rock, chamoislike, I leaped
downward toward the valley, in pursuit of Lys and her hideous abductor.

He was heavier than I by many pounds, and so weighted by the burden he
carried that I easily overtook him; and at last he turned, snarling, to
face me.  It was Kho of the tribe of Tsa, the hatchet-men.  He
recognized me, and with a low growl he threw Lys aside and came for me.
"The she is mine," he cried. "I kill!  I kill!"

I had had to discard my rifle before I commenced the rapid descent of
the cliff, so that now I was armed only with a hunting knife, and this
I whipped from its scabbard as Kho leaped toward me. He was a mighty
beast, mightily muscled, and the urge that has made males fight since
the dawn of life on earth filled him with the blood-lust and the thirst
to slay; but not one whit less did it fill me with the same primal
passions.  Two abysmal beasts sprang at each other's throats that day
beneath the shadow of earth's oldest cliffs--the man of now and the
man-thing of the earliest, forgotten then, imbued by the same deathless
passion that has come down unchanged through all the epochs, periods
and eras of time from the beginning, and which shall continue to the
incalculable end--woman, the imperishable Alpha and Omega of life.

Kho closed and sought my jugular with his teeth.  He seemed to forget
the hatchet dangling by its aurochs-hide thong at his hip, as I forgot,
for the moment, the dagger in my hand.  And I doubt not but that Kho
would easily have bested me in an encounter of that sort had not Lys'
voice awakened within my momentarily reverted brain the skill and
cunning of reasoning man.

"Bowen!" she cried.  "Your knife!  Your knife!"

It was enough.  It recalled me from the forgotten eon to which my brain
had flown and left me once again a modern man battling with a clumsy,
unskilled brute.  No longer did my jaws snap at the hairy throat before
me; but instead my knife sought and found a space between two ribs over
the savage heart.  Kho voiced a single horrid scream, stiffened
spasmodically and sank to the earth. And Lys threw herself into my
arms.  All the fears and sorrows of the past were wiped away, and once
again I was the happiest of men.

With some misgivings I shortly afterward cast my eyes upward toward the
precarious ledge which ran before my cave, for it seemed to me quite
beyond all reason to expect a dainty modern belle to essay the perils
of that frightful climb.  I asked her if she thought she could brave
the ascent, and she laughed gayly in my face.

"Watch!" she cried, and ran eagerly toward the base of the cliff. Like
a squirrel she clambered swiftly aloft, so that I was forced to exert
myself to keep pace with her.  At first she frightened me; but
presently I was aware that she was quite as safe here as was I. When we
finally came to my ledge and I again held her in my arms, she recalled
to my mind that for several weeks she had been living the life of a
cave-girl with the tribe of hatchet-men.  They had been driven from
their former caves by another tribe which had slain many and carried
off quite half the females, and the new cliffs to which they had flown
had proven far higher and more precipitous, so that she had become,
through necessity, a most practiced climber.

She told me of Kho's desire for her, since all his females had been
stolen and of how her life had been a constant nightmare of terror as
she sought by night and by day to elude the great brute. For a time
Nobs had been all the protection she required; but one day he
disappeared--nor has she seen him since.  She believes that he was
deliberately made away with; and so do I, for we both are sure that he
never would have deserted her.  With her means of protection gone, Lys
was now at the mercy of the hatchet-man; nor was it many hours before
he had caught her at the base of the cliff and seized her; but as he
bore her triumphantly aloft toward his cave, she had managed to break
loose and escape him.

"For three days he has pursued me," she said, "through this horrible
world.  How I have passed through in safety I cannot guess, nor how I
have always managed to outdistance him; yet I have done it, until just
as you discovered me.  Fate was kind to us, Bowen."

I nodded my head in assent and crushed her to me. And then we talked
and planned as I cooked antelope-steaks over my fire, and we came to
the conclusion that there was no hope of rescue, that she and I were
doomed to live and die upon Caprona.  Well, it might be worse!  I would
rather live here always with Lys than to live elsewhere without her;
and she, dear girl, says the same of me; but I am afraid of this life
for her.  It is a hard, fierce, dangerous life, and I shall pray always
that we shall be rescued from it--for her sake.

That night the clouds broke, and the moon shone down upon our little
ledge; and there, hand in hand, we turned our faces toward heaven and
plighted our troth beneath the eyes of God.  No human agency could have
married us more sacredly than we are wed.  We are man and wife, and we
are content.  If God wills it, we shall live out our lives here.  If He
wills otherwise, then this manuscript which I shall now consign to the
inscrutable forces of the sea shall fall into friendly hands.  However,
we are each without hope. And so we say good-bye in this, our last
message to the world beyond the barrier cliffs.

(Signed) Bowen J. Tyler, Jr. Lys La R. Tyler.