Chapter 6

As we strolled slowly back toward the boat, planning and discussing
this, we were suddenly startled by a loud and unmistakable detonation.

"A shell from the U-33!" exclaimed von Schoenvorts.

"What can be after signifyin'?" queried Olson.

"They are in trouble," I answered for all, "and it's up to us to get
back to them.  Drop that carcass," I directed the men carrying the
meat, "and follow me!"  I set off at a rapid run in the direction of
the harbor.

We ran for the better part of a mile without hearing anything more from
the direction of the harbor, and then I reduced the speed to a walk,
for the exercise was telling on us who had been cooped up for so long
in the confined interior of the U-33. Puffing and panting, we plodded
on until within about a mile of the harbor we came upon a sight that
brought us all up standing. We had been passing through a little
heavier timber than was usual to this part of the country, when we
suddenly emerged into an open space in the center of which was such a
band as might have caused the most courageous to pause.  It consisted
of upward of five hundred individuals representing several species
closely allied to man.  There were anthropoid apes and gorillas--these
I had no difficulty in recognizing; but there were other forms which I
had never before seen, and I was hard put to it to say whether they
were ape or man.  Some of them resembled the corpse we had found upon
the narrow beach against Caprona's sea-wall, while others were of a
still lower type, more nearly resembling the apes, and yet others were
uncannily manlike, standing there erect, being less hairy and
possessing better shaped heads.

There was one among the lot, evidently the leader of them, who bore a
close resemblance to the so-called Neanderthal man of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints.  There was the same short, stocky trunk upon which
rested an enormous head habitually bent forward into the same curvature
as the back, the arms shorter than the legs, and the lower leg
considerably shorter than that of modern man, the knees bent forward
and never straightened.  This creature and one or two others who
appeared to be of a lower order than he, yet higher than that of the
apes, carried heavy clubs; the others were armed only with giant
muscles and fighting fangs--nature's weapons. All were males, and all
were entirely naked; nor was there upon even the highest among them a
sign of ornamentation.

At sight of us they turned with bared fangs and low growls to confront
us.  I did not wish to fire among them unless it became absolutely
necessary, and so I started to lead my party around them; but the
instant that the Neanderthal man guessed my intention, he evidently
attributed it to cowardice upon our part, and with a wild cry he leaped
toward us, waving his cudgel above his head.  The others followed him,
and in a minute we should have been overwhelmed.  I gave the order to
fire, and at the first volley six of them went down, including the
Neanderthal man. The others hesitated a moment and then broke for the
trees, some running nimbly among the branches, while others lost
themselves to us between the boles.  Both von Schoenvorts and I noticed
that at least two of the higher, manlike types took to the trees quite
as nimbly as the apes, while others that more nearly approached man in
carriage and appearance sought safety upon the ground with the gorillas.

An examination disclosed that five of our erstwhile opponents were dead
and the sixth, the Neanderthal man, was but slightly wounded, a bullet
having glanced from his thick skull, stunning him. We decided to take
him with us to camp, and by means of belts we managed to secure his
hands behind his back and place a leash around his neck before he
regained consciousness.  We then retraced our steps for our meat being
convinced by our own experience that those aboard the U-33 had been
able to frighten off this party with a single shell--but when we came
to where we had left the deer it had disappeared.

On the return journey Whitely and I preceded the rest of the party by
about a hundred yards in the hope of getting another shot at something
edible, for we were all greatly disgusted and disappointed by the loss
of our venison.  Whitely and I advanced very cautiously, and not having
the whole party with us, we fared better than on the journey out,
bagging two large antelope not a half-mile from the harbor; so with our
game and our prisoner we made a cheerful return to the boat, where we
found that all were safe.  On the shore a little north of where we lay
there were the corpses of twenty of the wild creatures who had attacked
Bradley and his party in our absence, and the rest of whom we had met
and scattered a few minutes later.

We felt that we had taught these wild ape-men a lesson and that because
of it we would be safer in the future--at least safer from them; but we
decided not to abate our carefulness one whit, feeling that this new
world was filled with terrors still unknown to us; nor were we wrong.

The following morning we commenced work upon our camp, Bradley, Olson,
von Schoenvorts, Miss La Rue, and I having sat up half the night
discussing the matter and drawing plans.  We set the men at work
felling trees, selecting for the purpose jarrah, a hard,
weather-resisting timber which grew in profusion near by.  Half the men
labored while the other half stood guard, alternating each hour with an
hour off at noon.  Olson directed this work.  Bradley, von Schoenvorts
and I, with Miss La Rue's help, staked out the various buildings and
the outer wall.  When the day was done, we had quite an array of logs
nicely notched and ready for our building operations on the morrow, and
we were all tired, for after the buildings had been staked out we all
fell in and helped with the logging--all but von Schoenvorts.  He,
being a Prussian and a gentleman, couldn't stoop to such menial labor
in the presence of his men, and I didn't see fit to ask it of him, as
the work was purely voluntary upon our part.  He spent the afternoon
shaping a swagger-stick from the branch of jarrah and talking with Miss
La Rue, who had sufficiently unbent toward him to notice his existence.

We saw nothing of the wild men of the previous day, and only once were
we menaced by any of the strange denizens of Caprona, when some
frightful nightmare of the sky swooped down upon us, only to be driven
off by a fusillade of bullets.  The thing appeared to be some variety
of pterodactyl, and what with its enormous size and ferocious aspect
was most awe-inspiring.  There was another incident, too, which to me
at least was far more unpleasant than the sudden onslaught of the
prehistoric reptile.  Two of the men, both Germans, were stripping a
felled tree of its branches. Von Schoenvorts had completed his
swagger-stick, and he and I were passing close to where the two worked.

One of them threw to his rear a small branch that he had just chopped
off, and as misfortune would have it, it struck von Schoenvorts across
the face.  It couldn't have hurt him, for it didn't leave a mark; but
he flew into a terrific rage, shouting: "Attention!" in a loud voice.
The sailor immediately straightened up, faced his officer, clicked his
heels together and saluted.  "Pig!" roared the Baron, and struck the
fellow across the face, breaking his nose.  I grabbed von Schoenvorts'
arm and jerked him away before he could strike again, if such had been
his intention, and then he raised his little stick to strike me; but
before it descended the muzzle of my pistol was against his belly and
he must have seen in my eyes that nothing would suit me better than an
excuse to pull the trigger.  Like all his kind and all other bullies,
von Schoenvorts was a coward at heart, and so he dropped his hand to
his side and started to turn away; but I pulled him back, and there
before his men I told him that such a thing must never again
occur--that no man was to be struck or otherwise punished other than in
due process of the laws that we had made and the court that we had
established. All the time the sailor stood rigidly at attention, nor
could I tell from his expression whether he most resented the blow his
officer had struck him or my interference in the gospel of the
Kaiser-breed.  Nor did he move until I said to him:  "Plesser, you may
return to your quarters and dress your wound."  Then he saluted and
marched stiffly off toward the U-33.

Just before dusk we moved out into the bay a hundred yards from shore
and dropped anchor, for I felt that we should be safer there than
elsewhere.  I also detailed men to stand watch during the night and
appointed Olson officer of the watch for the entire night, telling him
to bring his blankets on deck and get what rest he could.  At dinner we
tasted our first roast Caprona antelope, and we had a mess of greens
that the cook had found growing along the stream.  All during the meal
von Schoenvorts was silent and surly.

After dinner we all went on deck and watched the unfamiliar scenes of a
Capronian night--that is, all but von Schoenvorts. There was less to
see than to hear.  From the great inland lake behind us came the
hissing and the screaming of countless saurians. Above us we heard the
flap of giant wings, while from the shore rose the multitudinous voices
of a tropical jungle--of a warm, damp atmosphere such as must have
enveloped the entire earth during the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras.  But
here were intermingled the voices of later eras--the scream of the
panther, the roar of the lion, the baying of wolves and a thunderous
growling which we could attribute to nothing earthly but which one day
we were to connect with the most fearsome of ancient creatures.

One by one the others went to their rooms, until the girl and I were
left alone together, for I had permitted the watch to go below for a
few minutes, knowing that I would be on deck. Miss La Rue was very
quiet, though she replied graciously enough to whatever I had to say
that required reply.  I asked her if she did not feel well.

"Yes," she said, "but I am depressed by the awfulness of it all. I feel
of so little consequence--so small and helpless in the face of all
these myriad manifestations of life stripped to the bone of its
savagery and brutality.  I realize as never before how cheap and
valueless a thing is life.  Life seems a joke, a cruel, grim joke.  You
are a laughable incident or a terrifying one as you happen to be less
powerful or more powerful than some other form of life which crosses
your path; but as a rule you are of no moment whatsoever to anything
but yourself.  You are a comic little figure, hopping from the cradle
to the grave.  Yes, that is our trouble--we take ourselves too
seriously; but Caprona should be a sure cure for that."  She paused and
laughed.

"You have evolved a beautiful philosophy," I said.  "It fills such a
longing in the human breast.  It is full, it is satisfying, it is
ennobling.  What wondrous strides toward perfection the human race
might have made if the first man had evolved it and it had persisted
until now as the creed of humanity."

"I don't like irony," she said; "it indicates a small soul."

"What other sort of soul, then, would you expect from `a comic little
figure hopping from the cradle to the grave'?" I inquired. "And what
difference does it make, anyway, what you like and what you don't like?
You are here for but an instant, and you mustn't take yourself too
seriously."

She looked up at me with a smile.  "I imagine that I am frightened and
blue," she said, "and I know that I am very, very homesick and lonely."
There was almost a sob in her voice as she concluded.  It was the first
time that she had spoken thus to me.  Involuntarily, I laid my hand
upon hers where it rested on the rail.

"I know how difficult your position is," I said; "but don't feel that
you are alone.  There is--is one here who--who would do anything in the
world for you," I ended lamely.  She did not withdraw her hand, and she
looked up into my face with tears on her cheeks and I read in her eyes
the thanks her lips could not voice. Then she looked away across the
weird moonlit landscape and sighed. Evidently her new-found philosophy
had tumbled about her ears, for she was seemingly taking herself
seriously.  I wanted to take her in my arms and tell her how I loved
her, and had taken her hand from the rail and started to draw her
toward me when Olson came blundering up on deck with his bedding.

The following morning we started building operations in earnest, and
things progressed finely.  The Neanderthal man was something of a care,
for we had to keep him in irons all the time, and he was mighty savage
when approached; but after a time he became more docile, and then we
tried to discover if he had a language. Lys spent a great deal of time
talking to him and trying to draw him out; but for a long while she was
unsuccessful.  It took us three weeks to build all the houses, which we
constructed close by a cold spring some two miles from the harbor.

We changed our plans a trifle when it came to building the palisade,
for we found a rotted cliff near by where we could get all the flat
building-stone we needed, and so we constructed a stone wall entirely
around the buildings.  It was in the form of a square, with bastions
and towers at each corner which would permit an enfilading fire along
any side of the fort, and was about one hundred and thirty-five feet
square on the outside, with walls three feet thick at the bottom and
about a foot and a half wide at the top, and fifteen feet high.  It
took a long time to build that wall, and we all turned in and helped
except von Schoenvorts, who, by the way, had not spoken to me except in
the line of official business since our encounter--a condition of armed
neutrality which suited me to a T.  We have just finished it, the last
touches being put on today.  I quit about a week ago and commenced
working on this chronicle for our strange adventures, which will
account for any minor errors in chronology which may have crept in;
there was so much material that I may have made some mistakes, but I
think they are but minor and few.

I see in reading over the last few pages that I neglected to state that
Lys finally discovered that the Neanderthal man possessed a language.
She has learned to speak it, and so have I, to some extent.  It was
he--his name he says is Am, or Ahm--who told us that this country is
called Caspak.  When we asked him how far it extended, he waved both
arms about his head in an all-including gesture which took in,
apparently, the entire universe. He is more tractable now, and we are
going to release him, for he has assured us that he will not permit his
fellows to harm us. He calls us Galus and says that in a short time he
will be a Galu. It is not quite clear to us what he means.  He says
that there are many Galus north of us, and that as soon as he becomes
one he will go and live with them.

Ahm went out to hunt with us yesterday and was much impressed by the
ease with which our rifles brought down antelopes and deer. We have
been living upon the fat of the land, Ahm having shown us the edible
fruits, tubers and herbs, and twice a week we go out after fresh meat.
A certain proportion of this we dry and store away, for we do not know
what may come.  Our drying process is really smoking.  We have also
dried a large quantity of two varieties of cereal which grow wild a few
miles south of us. One of these is a giant Indian maize--a lofty
perennial often fifty and sixty feet in height, with ears the size of
a man's body and kernels as large as your fist.  We have had to
construct a second store house for the great quantity of this that we
have gathered.

September 3, 1916:  Three months ago today the torpedo from the U-33
started me from the peaceful deck of the American liner upon the
strange voyage which has ended here in Caspak.  We have settled down to
an acceptance of our fate, for all are convinced that none of us will
ever see the outer world again.  Ahm's repeated assertions that there
are human beings like ourselves in Caspak have roused the men to a keen
desire for exploration.  I sent out one party last week under Bradley.
Ahm, who is now free to go and come as he wishes, accompanied them.
They marched about twenty-five miles due west, encountering many
terrible beasts and reptiles and not a few manlike creatures whom Ahm
sent away.  Here is Bradley's report of the expedition:

Marched fifteen miles the first day, camping on the bank of a large
stream which runs southward.  Game was plentiful and we saw several
varieties which we had not before encountered in Caspak. Just before
making camp we were charged by an enormous woolly rhinoceros, which
Plesser dropped with a perfect shot.  We had rhinoceros-steaks for
supper.  Ahm called the thing "Atis."  It was almost a continuous
battle from the time we left the fort until we arrived at camp.  The
mind of man can scarce conceive the plethora of carnivorous life in
this lost world; and their prey, of course, is even more abundant.

The second day we marched about ten miles to the foot of the cliffs.
Passed through dense forests close to the base of the cliffs. Saw
manlike creatures and a low order of ape in one band, and some of the
men swore that there was a white man among them. They were inclined to
attack us at first; but a volley from our rifles caused them to change
their minds.  We scaled the cliffs as far as we could; but near the top
they are absolutely perpendicular without any sufficient cleft or
protuberance to give hand or foot-hold.  All were disappointed, for we
hungered for a view of the ocean and the outside world.  We even had a
hope that we might see and attract the attention of a passing ship. Our
exploration has determined one thing which will probably be of little
value to us and never heard of beyond Caprona's walls--this crater was
once entirely filled with water. Indisputable evidence of this is on
the face of the cliffs.

Our return journey occupied two days and was as filled with adventure
as usual.  We are all becoming accustomed to adventure. It is beginning
to pall on us.  We suffered no casualties and there was no illness.


I had to smile as I read Bradley's report.  In those four days he had
doubtless passed through more adventures than an African big-game
hunter experiences in a lifetime, and yet he covered it all in a few
lines.  Yes, we are becoming accustomed to adventure. Not a day passes
that one or more of us does not face death at least once.  Ahm taught
us a few things that have proved profitable and saved us much
ammunition, which it is useless to expend except for food or in the
last recourse of self-preservation. Now when we are attacked by large
flying reptiles we run beneath spreading trees; when land carnivora
threaten us, we climb into trees, and we have learned not to fire at
any of the dinosaurs unless we can keep out of their reach for at least
two minutes after hitting them in the brain or spine, or five minutes
after puncturing their hearts--it takes them so long to die. To hit
them elsewhere is worse than useless, for they do not seem to notice
it, and we had discovered that such shots do not kill or even disable
them.

September 7, 1916:  Much has happened since I last wrote.  Bradley is
away again on another exploration expedition to the cliffs.  He expects
to be gone several weeks and to follow along their base in search of a
point where they may be scaled.  He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and
Tippet with him.  Ahm has disappeared.  He has been gone about three
days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von
Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil
about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs. Olson says
there is a geyser of oil there, and von Schoenvorts is making
preparations to refine it.  If he succeeds, we shall have the means for
leaving Caspak and returning to our own world. I can scarce believe the
truth of it.  We are all elated to the seventh heaven of bliss.  Pray
God we shall not be disappointed.

I have tried on several occasions to broach the subject of my love to
Lys; but she will not listen.