Chapter 7

October 8, 1916:  This is the last entry I shall make upon my
manuscript.  When this is done, I shall be through.  Though I may pray
that it reaches the haunts of civilized man, my better judgment tells
me that it will never be perused by other eyes than mine, and that even
though it should, it would be too late to avail me.  I am alone upon
the summit of the great cliff overlooking the broad Pacific.  A chill
south wind bites at my marrow, while far below me I can see the tropic
foliage of Caspak on the one hand and huge icebergs from the near
Antarctic upon the other.  Presently I shall stuff my folded manuscript
into the thermos bottle I have carried with me for the purpose since I
left the fort--Fort Dinosaur we named it--and hurl it far outward over
the cliff-top into the Pacific.  What current washes the shore of
Caprona I know not; whither my bottle will be borne I cannot even
guess; but I have done all that mortal man may do to notify the world
of my whereabouts and the dangers that threaten those of us who remain
alive in Caspak--if there be any other than myself.

About the 8th of September I accompanied Olson and von Schoenvorts to
the oil-geyser.  Lys came with us, and we took a number of things which
von Schoenvorts wanted for the purpose of erecting a crude refinery.
We went up the coast some ten or twelve miles in the U-33, tying up to
shore near the mouth of a small stream which emptied great volumes of
crude oil into the sea--I find it difficult to call this great lake by
any other name. Then we disembarked and went inland about five miles,
where we came upon a small lake entirely filled with oil, from the
center of which a geyser of oil spouted.

On the edge of the lake we helped von Schoenvorts build his primitive
refinery.  We worked with him for two days until he got things fairly
well started, and then we returned to Fort Dinosaur, as I feared that
Bradley might return and be worried by our absence. The U-33 merely
landed those of us that were to return to the fort and then retraced
its course toward the oil-well.  Olson, Whitely, Wilson, Miss La Rue,
and myself disembarked, while von Schoenvorts and his German crew
returned to refine the oil.  The next day Plesser and two other Germans
came down overland for ammunition. Plesser said they had been attacked
by wild men and had exhausted a great deal of ammunition.  He also
asked permission to get some dried meat and maize, saying that they
were so busy with the work of refining that they had no time to hunt.
I let him have everything he asked for, and never once did a suspicion
of their intentions enter my mind.  They returned to the oil-well the
same day, while we continued with the multitudinous duties of camp life.

For three days nothing of moment occurred.  Bradley did not return; nor
did we have any word from von Schoenvorts.  In the evening Lys and I
went up into one of the bastion towers and listened to the grim and
terrible nightlife of the frightful ages of the past.  Once a
saber-tooth screamed almost beneath us, and the girl shrank close
against me.  As I felt her body against mine, all the pent love of
these three long months shattered the bonds of timidity and conviction,
and I swept her up into my arms and covered her face and lips with
kisses.  She did not struggle to free herself; but instead her dear
arms crept up about my neck and drew my own face even closer to hers.

"You love me, Lys?" I cried.

I felt her head nod an affirmative against my breast.  "Tell me, Lys,"
I begged, "tell me in words how much you love me."

Low and sweet and tender came the answer:  "I love you beyond all
conception."

My heart filled with rapture then, and it fills now as it has each of
the countless times I have recalled those dear words, as it shall fill
always until death has claimed me.  I may never see her again; she may
not know how I love her--she may question, she may doubt; but always
true and steady, and warm with the fires of love my heart beats for the
girl who said that night:  "I love you beyond all conception."

For a long time we sat there upon the little bench constructed for the
sentry that we had not as yet thought it necessary to post in more than
one of the four towers.  We learned to know one another better in those
two brief hours than we had in all the months that had intervened since
we had been thrown together.  She told me that she had loved me from
the first, and that she never had loved von Schoenvorts, their
engagement having been arranged by her aunt for social reasons.

That was the happiest evening of my life; nor ever do I expect to
experience its like; but at last, as is the way of happiness, it
terminated.  We descended to the compound, and I walked with Lys to the
door of her quarters.  There again she kissed me and bade me good
night, and then she went in and closed the door.

I went to my own room, and there I sat by the light of one of the crude
candles we had made from the tallow of the beasts we had killed, and
lived over the events of the evening.  At last I turned in and fell
asleep, dreaming happy dreams and planning for the future, for even in
savage Caspak I was bound to make my girl safe and happy.  It was
daylight when I awoke.  Wilson, who was acting as cook, was up and
astir at his duties in the cook-house. The others slept; but I arose
and followed by Nobs went down to the stream for a plunge.  As was our
custom, I went armed with both rifle and revolver; but I stripped and
had my swim without further disturbance than the approach of a large
hyena, a number of which occupied caves in the sand-stone cliffs north
of the camp. These brutes are enormous and exceedingly ferocious.  I
imagine they correspond with the cave-hyena of prehistoric times. This
fellow charged Nobs, whose Capronian experiences had taught him that
discretion is the better part of valor--with the result that he dived
head foremost into the stream beside me after giving vent to a series
of ferocious growls which had no more effect upon Hyaena spelaeus than
might a sweet smile upon an enraged tusker. Afterward I shot the beast,
and Nobs had a feast while I dressed, for he had become quite a
raw-meat eater during our numerous hunting expeditions, upon which we
always gave him a portion of the kill.

Whitely and Olson were up and dressed when we returned, and we all sat
down to a good breakfast.  I could not but wonder at Lys' absence from
the table, for she had always been one of the earliest risers in camp;
so about nine o'clock, becoming apprehensive lest she might be
indisposed, I went to the door of her room and knocked.  I received no
response, though I finally pounded with all my strength; then I turned
the knob and entered, only to find that she was not there.  Her bed had
been occupied, and her clothing lay where she had placed it the
previous night upon retiring; but Lys was gone.  To say that I was
distracted with terror would be to put it mildly.  Though I knew she
could not be in camp, I searched every square inch of the compound and
all the buildings, yet without avail.

It was Whitely who discovered the first clue--a huge human-like
footprint in the soft earth beside the spring, and indications of a
struggle in the mud.

Then I found a tiny handkerchief close to the outer wall. Lys  had been
stolen!  It was all too plain.  Some hideous member of the ape-man
tribe had entered the fort and carried her off. While I stood stunned
and horrified at the frightful evidence before me, there came from the
direction of the great lake an increasing sound that rose to the volume
of a shriek.  We all looked up as the noise approached apparently just
above us, and a moment later there followed a terrific explosion which
hurled us to the ground.  When we clambered to our feet, we saw a large
section of the west wall torn and shattered.  It was Olson who first
recovered from his daze sufficiently to guess the explanation of the
phenomenon.

"A shell!" he cried.  "And there ain't no shells in Caspak besides
what's on the U-33.  The dirty boches are shellin' the fort.  Come on!"
And he grasped his rifle and started on a run toward the lake.  It was
over two miles, but we did not pause until the harbor was in view, and
still we could not see the lake because of the sandstone cliffs which
intervened.  We ran as fast as we could around the lower end of the
harbor, scrambled up the cliffs and at last stood upon their summit in
full view of the lake. Far away down the coast, toward the river
through which we had come to reach the lake, we saw upon the surface
the outline of the U-33, black smoke vomiting from her funnel.

Von Schoenvorts had succeeded in refining the oil!  The cur had broken
his every pledge and was leaving us there to our fates. He had even
shelled the fort as a parting compliment; nor could anything have been
more truly Prussian than this leave-taking of the Baron Friedrich von
Schoenvorts.

Olson, Whitely, Wilson, and I stood for a moment looking at one
another.  It seemed incredible that man could be so perfidious--that we
had really seen with our own eyes the thing that we had seen; but when
we returned to the fort, the shattered wall gave us ample evidence that
there was no mistake.

Then we began to speculate as to whether it had been an ape-man or a
Prussian that had abducted Lys.  From what we knew of von Schoenvorts,
we would not have been surprised at anything from him; but the
footprints by the spring seemed indisputable evidence that one of
Caprona's undeveloped men had borne off the girl I loved.

As soon as I had assured myself that such was the case, I made my
preparations to follow and rescue her.  Olson, Whitely, and Wilson each
wished to accompany me; but I told them that they were needed here,
since with Bradley's party still absent and the Germans gone it was
necessary that we conserve our force as far as might be possible.