Chapter 5

The steaks we had that night, and they were fine; and the following
morning we tasted the broth.  It seemed odd to be eating a creature
that should, by all the laws of paleontology, have been extinct for
several million years.  It gave one a feeling of newness that was
almost embarrassing, although it didn't seem to embarrass our
appetites.  Olson ate until I thought he would burst.

The girl ate with us that night at the little officers' mess just back
of the torpedo compartment.  The narrow table was unfolded; the four
stools were set out; and for the first time in days we sat down to eat,
and for the first time in weeks we had something to eat other than the
monotony of the short rations of an impoverished U-boat.  Nobs sat
between the girl and me and was fed with morsels of the Plesiosaurus
steak, at the risk of forever contaminating his manners.  He looked at
me sheepishly all the time, for he knew that no well-bred dog should
eat at table; but the poor fellow was so wasted from improper food that
I couldn't enjoy my own meal had he been denied an immediate share in
it; and anyway Lys wanted to feed him.  So there you are.

Lys was coldly polite to me and sweetly gracious to Bradley and Olson.
She wasn't of the gushing type, I knew; so I didn't expect much from
her and was duly grateful for the few morsels of attention she threw
upon the floor to me.  We had a pleasant meal, with only one
unfortunate occurrence--when Olson suggested that possibly the creature
we were eating was the same one that ate the German.  It was some time
before we could persuade the girl to continue her meal, but at last
Bradley prevailed upon her, pointing out that we had come upstream
nearly forty miles since the boche had been seized, and that during
that time we had seen literally thousands of these denizens of the
river, indicating that the chances were very remote that this was the
same Plesiosaur.  "And anyway," he concluded, "it was only a scheme of
Mr. Olson's to get all the steaks for himself."

We discussed the future and ventured opinions as to what lay before us;
but we could only theorize at best, for none of us knew.  If the whole
land was infested by these and similar horrid monsters, life would be
impossible upon it, and we decided that we would only search long
enough to find and take aboard fresh water and such meat and fruits as
might be safely procurable and then retrace our way beneath the cliffs
to the open sea.

And so at last we turned into our narrow bunks, hopeful, happy and at
peace with ourselves, our lives and our God, to awaken the following
morning refreshed and still optimistic.  We had an easy time getting
away--as we learned later, because the saurians do not commence to feed
until late in the morning.  From noon to midnight their curve of
activity is at its height, while from dawn to about nine o'clock it is
lowest.  As a matter of fact, we didn't see one of them all the time we
were getting under way, though I had the cannon raised to the deck and
manned against an assault.  I hoped, but I was none too sure, that
shells might discourage them.  The trees were full of monkeys of all
sizes and shades, and once we thought we saw a manlike creature
watching us from the depth of the forest.

Shortly after we resumed our course upstream, we saw the mouth of
another and smaller river emptying into the main channel from the
south--that is, upon our right; and almost immediately after we came
upon a large island five or six miles in length; and at fifty miles
there was a still larger river than the last coming in from the
northwest, the course of the main stream having now changed to
northeast by southwest.  The water was quite free from reptiles, and
the vegetation upon the banks of the river had altered to more open and
parklike forest, with eucalyptus and acacia mingled with a scattering
of tree ferns, as though two distinct periods of geologic time had
overlapped and merged. The grass, too, was less flowering, though there
were still gorgeous patches mottling the greensward; and lastly, the
fauna was less multitudinous.

Six or seven miles farther, and the river widened considerably; before
us opened an expanse of water to the farther horizon, and then we
sailed out upon an inland sea so large that only a shore-line upon our
side was visible to us.  The waters all about us were alive with life.
There were still a few reptiles; but there were fish by the thousands,
by the millions.

The water of the inland sea was very warm, almost hot, and the
atmosphere was hot and heavy above it.  It seemed strange that beyond
the buttressed walls of Caprona icebergs floated and the south wind was
biting, for only a gentle breeze moved across the face of these living
waters, and that was damp and warm. Gradually, we commenced to divest
ourselves of our clothing, retaining only sufficient for modesty; but
the sun was not hot. It was more the heat of a steam-room than of an
oven.

We coasted up the shore of the lake in a north-westerly direction,
sounding all the time.  We found the lake deep and the bottom rocky and
steeply shelving toward the center, and once when I moved straight out
from shore to take other soundings we could find no bottom whatsoever.
In open spaces along the shore we caught occasional glimpses of the
distant cliffs, and here they appeared only a trifle less precipitous
than those which bound Caprona on the seaward side.  My theory is that
in a far distant era Caprona was a mighty mountain--perhaps the world's
mightiest mountain--and that in some titanic eruption volcanic action
blew off the entire crest, blew thousands of feet of the mountain upward
and outward and onto the surrounding continent, leaving a great crater;
and then, possibly, the continent sank as ancient continents have been
known to do, leaving only the summit of Caprona above the sea. The
encircling walls, the central lake, the hot springs which feed the lake,
all point to such a conclusion, and the fauna and the flora bear
indisputable evidence that Caprona was once part of some great land-mass.

As we cruised up along the coast, the landscape continued a more or
less open forest, with here and there a small plain where we saw
animals grazing.  With my glass I could make out a species of large red
deer, some antelope and what appeared to be a species of horse; and
once I saw the shaggy form of what might have been a monstrous bison.
Here was game a plenty!  There seemed little danger of starving upon
Caprona.  The game, however, seemed wary; for the instant the animals
discovered us, they threw up their heads and tails and went cavorting
off, those farther inland following the example of the others until all
were lost in the mazes of the distant forest.  Only the great, shaggy
ox stood his ground.  With lowered head he watched us until we had
passed, and then continued feeding.

About twenty miles up the coast from the mouth of the river we
encountered low cliffs of sandstone, broken and tortured evidence of
the great upheaval which had torn Caprona asunder in the past,
intermingling upon a common level the rock formations of widely
separated eras, fusing some and leaving others untouched.

We ran along beside them for a matter of ten miles, arriving off a
broad cleft which led into what appeared to be another lake. As we were
in search of pure water, we did not wish to overlook any portion of the
coast, and so after sounding and finding that we had ample depth, I ran
the U-33 between head-lands into as pretty a landlocked harbor as
sailormen could care to see, with good water right up to within a few
yards of the shore.  As we cruised slowly along, two of the boches
again saw what they believed to be a man, or manlike creature, watching
us from a fringe of trees a hundred yards inland, and shortly after we
discovered the mouth of a small stream emptying into the bay. It was
the first stream we had found since leaving the river, and I at once
made preparations to test its water.  To land, it would be necessary to
run the U-33 close in to the shore, at least as close as we could, for
even these waters were infested, though, not so thickly, by savage
reptiles.  I ordered sufficient water let into the diving-tanks to
lower us about a foot, and then I ran the bow slowly toward the shore,
confident that should we run aground, we still had sufficient lifting
force to free us when the water should be pumped out of the tanks; but
the bow nosed its way gently into the reeds and touched the shore with
the keel still clear.

My men were all armed now with both rifles and pistols, each having
plenty of ammunition.  I ordered one of the Germans ashore with a line,
and sent two of my own men to guard him, for from what little we had
seen of Caprona, or Caspak as we learned later to call the interior, we
realized that any instant some new and terrible danger might confront
us.  The line was made fast to a small tree, and at the same time I had
the stern anchor dropped.

As soon as the boche and his guard were aboard again, I called all
hands on deck, including von Schoenvorts, and there I explained to them
that the time had come for us to enter into some sort of an agreement
among ourselves that would relieve us of the annoyance and
embarrassment of being divided into two antagonistic parts--prisoners
and captors.  I told them that it was obvious our very existence
depended upon our unity of action, that we were to all intent and
purpose entering a new world as far from the seat and causes of our own
world-war as if millions of miles of space and eons of time separated
us from our past lives and habitations.

"There is no reason why we should carry our racial and political
hatreds into Caprona," I insisted.  "The Germans among us might kill
all the English, or the English might kill the last German, without
affecting in the slightest degree either the outcome of even the
smallest skirmish upon the western front or the opinion of a single
individual in any belligerent or neutral country. I therefore put the
issue squarely to you all; shall we bury our animosities and work
together with and for one another while we remain upon Caprona, or must
we continue thus divided and but half armed, possibly until death has
claimed the last of us?  And let me tell you, if you have not already
realized it, the chances are a thousand to one that not one of us ever
will see the outside world again.  We are safe now in the matter of
food and water; we could provision the U-33 for a long cruise; but we
are practically out of fuel, and without fuel we cannot hope to reach
the ocean, as only a submarine can pass through the barrier cliffs.
What is your answer?" I turned toward von Schoenvorts.

He eyed me in that disagreeable way of his and demanded to know, in
case they accepted my suggestion, what their status would be in event
of our finding a way to escape with the U-33.  I replied that I felt
that if we had all worked loyally together we should leave Caprona upon
a common footing, and to that end I suggested that should the remote
possibility of our escape in the submarine develop into reality, we
should then immediately make for the nearest neutral port and give
ourselves into the hands of the authorities, when we should all
probably be interned for the duration of the war.  To my surprise he
agreed that this was fair and told me that they would accept my
conditions and that I could depend upon their loyalty to the common
cause.

I thanked him and then addressed each one of his men individually, and
each gave me his word that he would abide by all that I had outlined.
It was further understood that we were to act as a military
organization under military rules and discipline--I as commander, with
Bradley as my first lieutenant and Olson as my second, in command of
the Englishmen; while von Schoenvorts was to act as an additional
second lieutenant and have charge of his own men.  The four of us were
to constitute a military court under which men might be tried and
sentenced to punishment for infraction of military rules and
discipline, even to the passing of the death-sentence.

I then had arms and ammunition issued to the Germans, and leaving
Bradley and five men to guard the U-33, the balance of us went ashore.
The first thing we did was to taste the water of the little
stream--which, to our delight, we found sweet, pure and cold.  This
stream was entirely free from dangerous reptiles, because, as I later
discovered, they became immediately dormant when subjected to a much
lower temperature than 70 degrees Fahrenheit.  They dislike cold water
and keep as far away from it as possible.  There were countless
brook-trout here, and deep holes that invited us to bathe, and along
the bank of the stream were trees bearing a close resemblance to ash
and beech and oak, their characteristics evidently induced by the lower
temperature of the air above the cold water and by the fact that their
roots were watered by the water from the stream rather than from the
warm springs which we afterward found in such abundance elsewhere.

Our first concern was to fill the water tanks of the U-33 with fresh
water, and that having been accomplished, we set out to hunt for game
and explore inland for a short distance.  Olson, von Schoenvorts, two
Englishmen and two Germans accompanied me, leaving ten to guard the
ship and the girl.  I had intended leaving Nobs behind, but he got away
and joined me and was so happy over it that I hadn't the heart to send
him back.  We followed the stream upward through a beautiful country
for about five miles, and then came upon its source in a little
boulder-strewn clearing. From among the rocks bubbled fully twenty
ice-cold springs. North of the clearing rose sandstone cliffs to a
height of some fifty to seventy-five feet, with tall trees growing at
their base and almost concealing them from our view.  To the west the
country was flat and sparsely wooded, and here it was that we saw our
first game--a large red deer.  It was grazing away from us and had not
seen us when one of my men called my attention to it.  Motioning for
silence and having the rest of the party lie down, I crept toward the
quarry, accompanied only by Whitely.  We got within a hundred yards of
the deer when he suddenly raised his antlered head and pricked up his
great ears.  We both fired at once and had the satisfaction of seeing
the buck drop; then we ran forward to finish him with our knives.  The
deer lay in a small open space close to a clump of acacias, and we had
advanced to within several yards of our kill when we both halted
suddenly and simultaneously. Whitely looked at me, and I looked at
Whitely, and then we both looked back in the direction of the deer.

"Blime!" he said.  "Wot is hit, sir?"

"It looks to me, Whitely, like an error," I said; "some assistant god
who had been creating elephants must have been temporarily transferred
to the lizard-department."

"Hi wouldn't s'y that, sir," said Whitely; "it sounds blasphemous."

"It is no more blasphemous than that thing which is swiping our meat," I
replied, for whatever the thing was, it had leaped upon our deer and
was devouring it in great mouthfuls which it swallowed without
mastication.  The creature appeared to be a great lizard at least ten
feet high, with a huge, powerful tail as long as its torso, mighty hind
legs and short forelegs.  When it had advanced from the wood, it hopped
much after the fashion of a kangaroo, using its hind feet and tail to
propel it, and when it stood erect, it sat upon its tail.  Its head was
long and thick, with a blunt muzzle, and the opening of the jaws ran
back to a point behind the eyes, and the jaws were armed with long
sharp teeth. The scaly body was covered with black and yellow spots
about a foot in diameter and irregular in contour.  These spots were
outlined in red with edgings about an inch wide.  The underside of the
chest, body and tail were a greenish white.

"Wot s'y we pot the bloomin' bird, sir?" suggested Whitely.

I told him to wait until I gave the word; then we would fire
simultaneously, he at the heart and I at the spine.

"Hat the 'eart, sir--yes, sir," he replied, and raised his piece to his
shoulder.

Our shots rang out together.  The thing raised its head and looked
about until its eyes rested upon us; then it gave vent to a most
appalling hiss that rose to the crescendo of a terrific shriek and came
for us.

"Beat it, Whitely!" I cried as I turned to run.

We were about a quarter of a mile from the rest of our party, and in
full sight of them as they lay in the tall grass watching us. That they
saw all that had happened was evidenced by the fact that they now rose
and ran toward us, and at their head leaped Nobs. The creature in our
rear was gaining on us rapidly when Nobs flew past me like a meteor and
rushed straight for the frightful reptile. I tried to recall him, but
he would pay no attention to me, and as I couldn't see him sacrificed,
I, too, stopped and faced the monster. The creature appeared to be more
impressed with Nobs than by us and our firearms, for it stopped as the
Airedale dashed at it growling, and struck at him viciously with its
powerful jaws.

Nobs, though, was lightning by comparison with the slow thinking beast
and dodged his opponent's thrust with ease.  Then he raced to the rear
of the tremendous thing and seized it by the tail. There Nobs made the
error of his life.  Within that mottled organ were the muscles of a
Titan, the force of a dozen mighty catapults, and the owner of the tail
was fully aware of the possibilities which it contained.  With a single
flip of the tip it sent poor Nobs sailing through the air a hundred
feet above the ground, straight back into the clump of acacias from
which the beast had leaped upon our kill--and then the grotesque thing
sank lifeless to the ground.

Olson and von Schoenvorts came up a minute later with their men; then
we all cautiously approached the still form upon the ground. The
creature was quite dead, and an examination resulted in disclosing the
fact that Whitely's bullet had pierced its heart, and mine had severed
the spinal cord.

"But why didn't it die instantly?" I exclaimed.

"Because," said von Schoenvorts in his disagreeable way, "the beast is
so large, and its nervous organization of so low a caliber, that it
took all this time for the intelligence of death to reach and be
impressed upon the minute brain.  The thing was dead when your bullets
struck it; but it did not know it for several seconds--possibly a
minute.  If I am not mistaken, it is an Allosaurus of the Upper
Jurassic, remains of which have been found in Central Wyoming, in the
suburbs of New York."

An Irishman by the name of Brady grinned.  I afterward learned that he
had served three years on the traffic-squad of the Chicago police force.

I had been calling Nobs in the meantime and was about to set out in
search of him, fearing, to tell the truth, to do so lest I find him
mangled and dead among the trees of the acacia grove, when he suddenly
emerged from among the boles, his ears flattened, his tail between his
legs and his body screwed into a suppliant S. He was unharmed except
for minor bruises; but he was the most chastened dog I have ever seen.

We gathered up what was left of the red deer after skinning and
cleaning it, and set out upon our return journey toward the U-boat. On
the way Olson, von Schoenvorts and I discussed the needs of our
immediate future, and we were unanimous in placing foremost the
necessity of a permanent camp on shore.  The interior of a U-boat is
about as impossible and uncomfortable an abiding-place as one can well
imagine, and in this warm climate, and in warm water, it was almost
unendurable.  So we decided to construct a palisaded camp.